GOHAR BEGAM V. SUGGI ALIAS NAZMA BEGAM & ORS [1959] INSC 106; AIR 1960 SC 93; 1960 (1) SCR 597 (27 August 1959)


27/08/1959 SARKAR, A.K.
SARKAR, A.K.
IMAM, SYED JAFFER WANCHOO, K.N.

CITATION: 1960 AIR 93 1960 SCR (1) 597
ACT:
Habeas Corpus-Application for recovery of child-Duty of Court-Alternative remedy, if a bar-Principles applicable- Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 (V of 1898), s. 49r.

HEADNOTE:
An unmarried Sunni Muslim mother of an illegitimate female child made an application under s. 49I Of the Code of Criminal Procedure for the recovery of the child from the respondents.
Held, that under the Mohammedan Law the mother of an illegitimate female infant child is entitled to its custody.
The refusal to restore such a child to the custody of its mother would result in an illegal detention of the child within the meaning of S. 49I of the Criminal Procedure Code.
A dispute as to the paternity of the child is irrelevant for the purpose of the application. The Supreme Court will interfere with the discretionary powers of the High Court if the discretion was not judicially exercised.
Held, also, that before making the order for the custody of the child the court is called upon to consider its welfare.
Held, further, that the fact that a person has a remedy under the Guardian and Wards Act, is no justification for denying him the remedy under s. 49I Of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Held, further, that in issuing writs of habeas corpus the courts have power in the case of an infant to direct its custody to be placed with a certain person.
The Queen v. Clarke, [1857] EngR 140; (1857) 7 E.L. & B.L. 186 and The King v. Greenhill, (1836) AD & E. 624, relied on.
Zara Bibi v. Abdul Razzak, (1910) XII Bom. L.R. 891;
Subbuswami Gounden v. K. Kamakshi Ammal, (1930) I.L.R. 53 Mad. 72 and Rama Iyer v. Nata Raja lyer, A.I.R. 1948 Mad.
294, referred to.

CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 11 of 1959.
Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated April 30,1958, of the Bombay High Court in Criminal Application No. 508 of 1958.
K. M. Desai and 1. N. Shroff, for the appellant.
Ganpat Rai, for respondents Nos. 1 to 4 and 6.
K.L. Hathi and B. H. Dhebar, for respondent No. 5, 76 598 1959. August 27. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by SARKAR J.-The appellant is an unmarried Sunni Moslem woman.
She has an infant female illegitimate child called Anjum.
The appellant made an application to the High Court at Bombay under s. 491 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for the recovery of the custody of the child from the respondents. That the application was refused. Hence this appeal.
The appellant's case is as follows: She is the daughter of one Panna Bai. The respondent Kaniz Begum is Panna Bai's sister. Kaniz Begum, whom it will be convenient to refer as the respondent, took the appellant over from Panna Bai and brought her up. Prior to 1951 the respondent had put her in the keeping of two persons and had thereby made pecuniary gain for herself. In 1951 the appellant met one Trivedi and since then she was been living continuously in his exclusive keeping. The appellant stayed with Trivedi at Jabalpur up to 1954. On September 4, 1952, the child Anjum was born to her by the said Trivedi. In November 1953 she bore another child to him of the name of Yusuf alias Babul. In 1954 the appellant with her said two children, her mother who had been living with her, and Trivedi left Jabalpur and came to live in Bombay. After coming to Bombay, Trivedi for sometime lived with his relatives as he could not find independent accommodation. -During this time, the appellant with her children and mother stayed with the respondent who was then living in Bombay, but Trivedi used to visit the appellant daily at the, residence of the respondent. In January 1956 the appellant bore a third child to Trivedi called Unus alias Chandu. After the birth of Unus, Trivedi took the appellant, her mother and the two younger children to a hill station near Bombay called Khandala and the party stayed there for three or four months. At the time the appellant had gone to Kandala, the respondent went to Pakistan on a temporary visa and she took the child Anjum with her presumably with the consent of the appellant, 599 After returning from Khandala, Trivedi was able to secure a flat for himself in Marine Drive, Bombay and the appellant with her mother and two sons began to stay with him there.
In April 1937 Trivedi moved into another flat in Warden Road, Bombay, with the appellant, her two younger children and mother and has since then been living there with them.
After the respondent returned from Pakistan with Anjum, the appellant who had then moved into the flat in Marine Drive, asked the respondent to send Anjum to her but the respondent refused to do so. Since then the respondent has been refusing to restore the custody of the child Anjum to the appellant.
In these circumstances, the appellant made her application under s. 491 of the Code of Criminal Procedure on April 18, 1958. She stated that she apprehended that the respondent would remove Anjum to Pakistan any day and there was already a visa for Anjum available for that purpose. She also stated that in view of the relationship between the parties she had not earlier taken the matter to court. On the date of the application the respondent was away in Pakistan. She had not however taken the child Anjum with her but had left her in her flat at Bombay in charge of her cousin Suggi and an Aya, Rozi Bhangera. The appellant stated that the respondent had asked her sister Bibi Banoo and the latter's husband Mahomed Yakub Munshi to look after the child. The appellant had therefore made these four persons only the respondents to her application. Later, on the respondent's arrival back in Bombay, she also was made a party to the application. The other respondents contended in the High Court that they had nothing to do with the child and had been made parties to the application unnecessarily. They have not appeared in this appeal It is clear however that they did not make over the custody of the child Anjum to the appellant when the application was made and the affidavits filed by them leave no doubt that their sympathies are with the respondent Kaniz Begum. The state of Bombay was also 'Made a respondent to the application, but that was a mere matter of form. The State has no interest 600 in the case and has not taken any part in the proceedings.
The respondent opposed the application denying the correctness of some of the allegations made in the petition of the appellant. She denied that Trivedi was the father of the child Anjum and said that the father was a Shia Moslem called Samin Naqui. She said that the appellant's mother had given the appellant to her to: bring up when very young as she had not the means to do so herself and since then the appellant had been living with her all along and left her flat in company with Trivedi only during her temporary absence in Pakistan in 1956. She denied that she had made the appellant live in the keeping of any person as alleged by the latter. She contended that she had intended that the appellant would marry and live a clean and respectable life but other influences operated upon her and she went to live with Trivedi as his mistress. She denied that she had prevented the appellant access to the child Anjum as the latter stated. She contended that she was looking after the child Anjum with great care and solicitude, and had put her in a good school and kept a special Aya for her. She also said that she was well off and had enough means to look after the child well. She contended that it was not in the interest of the child to live with the appellant because she was living in the keeping of a man who might turn her out and she would then have to seek the protection of another man. She said that she had no child of her own and was fond of Anjum whom she had been treating as her own child.
The learned Judges of the High Court observed that the case raised various controversial questions specially as to the paternity of the child, as to whether the respondent had made the appellant live in the keeping of different persons and also as to whether she had prevented the appellant from having access to the to the child. The learned Judges observed that it was not the function of a court in an application under s. 491 to record findings on such controversial facts and that, in these circumstances, the proper forum for the appellant was to move a civil court under the 601 Guardian and Wards Act for the custody of the child. The learned Judges further observed that they were prima facie satisfied that the child was not illegally and improperly detained by the respondents. They therefore dismissed the appellant's application.
